clarify gaps in object/group IDs at relay (#587)
moq-wg/moq-transport: draft-ietf-moq-transport.md

matching subscribers in accordance to each subscription's priority, group order,
and delivery timeout.

Limited bandwidth upstream of the relay may result in gaps in the

> sequences of ObjectID values that the relay receives. For example if

Reviewer: If I understood the comments made in Boston, the *only* way such a gap can happen right now for non-datagrams is due to DELIVERY_TIMEOUT expiration and limited bandwidth by itself is not a cause of gaps.  Is that correct?

See also #582

Reviewer 2: This is my understanding, as well.

Reviewer 3: Agreed, also the subsequent paragraph is a bit daunting

then the relay may miss many of the objects with an ObjectID that is odd.
The upstream publisher could also drop objects or groups that had timed out
resulting  in gaps. Any real time system, which by definition has
constraints on how late the data can be delivered if it is delivered,
when running on the limited bandwidth internet is not going to be able
to guarantee delivery. There are also cases where a publisher lost its
connection to an upstream relay and then reconnects, in which case
objects can be delivered out of order to the downstream relay. A relay
cannot assume that it will see the first object in a group. Due to
order of clients joining as well as timeouts, a relay may end up only
seeing the some of the objects in a group. It is possible for a client
doing scalable video to publish the base layer over cellular, and the
enhancement layers over WiFi. This could result in some relays getting
the objects for both layers but other relays might only see one of the
layer. Object being delivered over unreliable datagrams can also create
gaps and out of order reception. What can be assumed is that the objects

> received on a single QUIC stream are in order but may have gaps.  These

Reviewer: This PR is adding non-normative text which is in conflict normative text here:

https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/blob/main/draft-ietf-moq-transport.md?plain=1#L740-L741

What happens to a subgroup with an object in the middle that misses the delivery timeout?  This PR says: omit the object and keep going.  Previous text says the relay cannot omit the object.  I'm not sure how to implement what is suggested in this PR for subgroups:

When I receive the beginning of an object from upstream, it's not past the delivery timeout -- that starts when the object is received -- so I will start forwarding it (eg: write it to a downstream QUIC stream).  If the end of the object does not arrive by the delivery timeout, I cannot retract the bytes already written.  I think the only recourse is to reset the entire stream (eg: drop the tail of the subgroup).  Is there another implementation you have in mind?

Reviewer 4: IIUC delivery timeout is considered even before inserting object in to the QUIC stream.  If the object stays within QUIC stream for ever,  it is still considered moving out of moq layer into transport layer.

Reviewer: Let me restate that to see if I got it:

You envision a system where the incoming object is queued outside of QUIC, and if the delivery timeout fires before it gets written to QUIC, you can skip over it.

Is that correct?

I imagine some relays might operate that way, and others might write incoming objects directly to the downstream stream (necessitating stream reset on timeout).  Is there an interoperability problem if clients assume one behavior or the other?

A related question is, when does the relay stop the delivery timeout timer - when the last byte of the object is written to the stream, when it's first transmitted, when it's ACK'd, or something else?  Maybe this one needs a separate issue.

Reviewer 4: > I imagine some relays might operate that way, and others might write incoming objects directly to the downstream stream (necessitating stream reset on timeout). Is there an interoperability problem if clients assume one behavior or the other?

This should work. Logic is same in both the case. 
Before inserting the object into the downstream QUIC stream, check for the delivery timeout and insert it.  Once inserted into QUIC stream, it needs to be treated as handed over from the moq  layer to the transport.

reasons can also impact whole groups and the relay cannot assume that it
will receive all groups or that it will see all the earlier groups in

> the Track.

Reviewer 4: @fluffy I took editorial liberty to fix few nits. Hope that's ok.

I like the clarification this brings. Thanks for writing this up.

Author: thank you

matching subscribers in accordance to each subscription's priority, group order,
and delivery timeout.

Any real time system, which by definition has constraints on how late
the data can be delivered, when running on the limited bandwidth
internet, is not going to be able to guarantee delivery of everything
but what is guaranteed is the order or object inside a stream if they
are delivered at all. In the case where the original publisher put the
even and odd frames on separate sub groups to do temporal scalability,
the stream carrying one of those sub groups will see the objectID
incrementing by more than one from one object in the stream to the next.

> Limited bandwidth upstream of the relay, combined with object delivery

Author: So I want to keep this only about relay to clients not relay to relay as that is a bit out of scope for MoQ

> Suggest removing terms `upstream` as that suggests a topology that is not defined in this spec.

timeouts, may result in some of the objected never being delivered.
Object being delivered over unreliable datagrams can loose objects and
have out of order reception.

Subscribers (and relays) can assume that the objects received on a
single QUIC stream are in the same order the original publisher intended
in that sub group. For example, if the original publisher put objects
with object ID 1,3,5,7 in the same subgroup, any downstream receiver
will get the object in the same order in the stream, if they are
received at all. So they might only get 1,3 and then have the stream
close but they will never get 1,5 then 3 on a stream.

There are also cases where a publisher lost its connection to an
upstream relay and then reconnects, in which case objects can be

> delivered on different streams to the downstream relay.  It is possible

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
delivered on different streams to the other relay(s).  It is possible
```

matching subscribers in accordance to each subscription's priority, group order,
and delivery timeout.

Any real time system, which by definition has constraints on how late
the data can be delivered, when running on the limited bandwidth
internet, is not going to be able to guarantee delivery of everything

> but what is guaranteed is the order or object inside a stream if they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but what is guaranteed is the order of objects inside a stream if they
```

are delivered at all. In the case where the original publisher put the
even and odd frames on separate sub groups to do temporal scalability,
the stream carrying one of those sub groups will see the objectID
incrementing by more than one from one object in the stream to the next.
Limited bandwidth upstream of the relay, combined with object delivery
timeouts, may result in some of the objects never being delivered.

> Object being delivered over unreliable datagrams can loose objects and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tracks being delivered over unreliable datagrams can lose objects and
```

have out of order reception.

Subscribers (and relays) can assume that the objects received on a
single QUIC stream are in the same order the original publisher intended
in that sub group. For example, if the original publisher put objects
with object ID 1,3,5,7 in the same subgroup, any receiver

> will get the object in the same order in the stream, if they are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will get the objects in the same order in the stream, if they are
```

received at all. So they might only get 1,3 and then have the stream
close but they will never get 1,5 then 3 on a stream.

There are also cases where a publisher lost its connection to an
upstream relay and then reconnects, in which case objects can be
delivered on different streams to the other relay(s).  It is possible
for a client doing scalable video to publish the base layer over
cellular, and the enhancement layers over WiFi.  This could result in
some relays getting the objects for both layers but other relays might
only see one of the layer.  These reasons can also impact whole groups
and the relay cannot assume that it will receive all groups or that it
will see all the earlier groups in the Track.

> If there is no downstram congestion, group are forwarded by a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there is no downstream congestion, groups are forwarded by a 
```

relay as soon as they are received. But as describe above, an 
upstream failure might have group 3 arrive before group 2. The 
rules in {{priorities}} are used to determine the order. If a 

> publisher chooses to send groups 30 then group 3, thoese rules 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
publisher chooses to send group 30 then group 3, those rules 
```
